
LAVILA-Powered Video Segment Search Application

1. Overview
The LAVILA-Powered Video Segment Search Application is a sophisticated tool designed to enable users to search through video segments using natural language queries. By leveraging the LAVILA (Large-scale Audio-Visual-Language Alignment) model, this system can generate meaningful text and video embeddings for accurate video segment retrieval based on the query entered.

This application is ideal for large datasets of videos where users need to quickly locate specific scenes or content without manually browsing through hours of footage. By utilizing a FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) index, the system efficiently retrieves video segments that are most relevant to the user's query.

Key Features:
- Multimodal Search: Enables searching across video segments based on text descriptions.
- Efficient Retrieval: Uses FAISS for high-speed search across large datasets.
- Scalability: Can handle large numbers of video segments with ease.
- Embeddings-Based: Powered by LAVILA for generating text and video embeddings for accurate retrieval.
- User-Friendly Web Interface: Built using Flask for easy interaction and use.

2. Features
- Search Across Video Segments: Allows users to search specific portions of video files by entering text-based queries.
- LAVILA Integration: The LAVILA model is employed to generate embeddings that help align text-based queries with video segments.
- FAISS for Fast Search: FAISS is used for efficient similarity search, ensuring that the retrieval process is quick and accurate.
- Video Upload and Indexing: Users can upload videos that are automatically segmented, indexed, and made searchable.
- Cosine Similarity for Accuracy: Embeddings are compared using cosine similarity to rank the relevance of the video segments returned.

3. System Architecture
The architecture of the project consists of the following key components:

3.1. LAVILA Model
LAVILA is a multimodal model that aligns visual and language features. In this project, it is used to generate embeddings from video content and text queries. These embeddings serve as the basis for searching through video segments.

3.2. FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search)
FAISS is an indexing system for efficient similarity search. The embeddings generated by LAVILA are stored in a FAISS index, allowing for fast retrieval of the most relevant segments based on user queries.

3.3. Flask Application
The front-end of the system is a Flask-based web application. It provides users with the interface to upload videos, submit search queries, and view the results.

3.4. Workflow
1. Video Segmentation: Videos are segmented into smaller parts, and embeddings are generated for each segment using the LAVILA model.
2. FAISS Index Creation: The embeddings are indexed using FAISS for fast search.
3. Search Query: A user submits a search query, and the text embedding is generated.
4. Matching: The system searches the FAISS index for the closest video segment matches.
5. Results: The relevant segments are returned and displayed on the web interface with video playback options.

4. Project Structure
The project is organized into the following structure:

/d/LLM Projects/lavila/GenAI-Projects/
├── .gitignore            # Specifies files ignored by Git
├── README.md             # Project description and documentation
├── app.py                # Main Flask application
├── env/                  # Python virtual environment
├── models/               # Contains LAVILA model and FAISS index
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies and libraries required by the project
├── scripts/              # Scripts for embedding generation and FAISS indexing
├── static/               # Static files (e.g., CSS, images, video files)
├── templates/            # HTML templates for the Flask application
└── video_segments/       # Processed video segments (after segmentation)

5. Setup and Installation

5.1. Prerequisites
Before running the project, ensure that the following software is installed:
- Python 3.8+
- Git
- FAISS
- Flask
- LAVILA model dependencies

5.2. Installation Instructions
1. Clone the Repository
   Clone the project repository from GitHub:
   git clone https://github.com/VivekRedD1999/GenAI-Projects.git
   cd GenAI-Projects

2. Create and Activate Virtual Environment
   Set up a virtual environment (recommended) to manage dependencies:
   python -m venv env
   source env/bin/activate  # On Windows, use `env\Scriptsctivate`

3. Install Dependencies
   Install the required dependencies using the requirements.txt file:
   pip install -r requirements.txt

4. Run the Flask Application
   Start the Flask application:
   python app.py

   The application will run locally on http://127.0.0.1:5000.

6. How to Use

6.1. Upload Videos
- Navigate to the video upload page.
- Upload videos by clicking on the "Upload" button.
- The system will automatically segment the video and prepare it for searching.

6.2. Search for Video Segments
- Enter a natural language query into the search box on the homepage.
- The system will process the query and return the most relevant video segments based on the text embedding.

6.3. View Search Results
- The results page will show the top matching video segments, along with timestamps and playback controls.
- You can click on any result to view the relevant video portion.

7. Generating the FAISS Index
The FAISS index is created to store embeddings for all video segments. You need to run the following script to generate the index:
python scripts/build_faiss_index.py

This script performs the following actions:
1. Loads the video segments and their embeddings.
2. Normalizes the embeddings to ensure that cosine similarity can be effectively used.
3. Creates and saves the FAISS index in the models/ directory.

8. Model Explanation
The LAVILA model is used to generate embeddings for both video content and user queries. These embeddings are aligned across modalities (video and text), allowing the system to effectively match video segments to text-based search queries. The FAISS index stores these embeddings for fast similarity searches.

8.1. How Embeddings Work
- For each video segment, the model generates a fixed-dimensional embedding that represents the visual and audio content.
- For each search query, a text embedding is generated using the same model, allowing the system to compare it with the video embeddings.

8.2. Cosine Similarity
- The FAISS system uses cosine similarity to find the most relevant video segments. This method measures the angle between two embedding vectors to determine their similarity.

9. Contributing

To contribute to the project, follow these steps:
1. Fork the Repository
   Fork the project repository on GitHub.

2. Create a Branch
   Create a new branch for your feature or bugfix:
   git checkout -b feature-name

3. Commit Your Changes
   Commit your code changes with a descriptive message:
   git commit -m "Add feature-name"

4. Push the Branch
   Push the branch to your forked repository:
   git push origin feature-name

5. Create a Pull Request
   Open a pull request to merge your changes into the main repository.

10. License
This project is licensed under the MIT License. You are free to use, modify, and distribute this software under the terms of the license.

11. FAQ

Q: What format do the videos need to be in?
A: The system currently supports .mp4 format videos. You can extend it to other formats by modifying the video processing script.

Q: Can I use this system for non-English queries?
A: The current implementation supports English-language queries. You can modify the model to support other languages by using multilingual embedding models.

Q: How large can the video files be?
A: There is no hard limit on the file size, but processing large files may require more memory and longer processing times.
